+++
lang="en-GB"
title="Behavioral biometrics - the next level of web security"
date="2019-04-04"
author="Mateusz Zaborski"
image="/blog/Behavioural_biometrics_Seqred_blog.jpeg"
tags=['ABC security','IT security']

+++

## Biometrics - safety without the need for complex passwords{ .article-section }

Biometrics is a solution used every day by almost everyone. Every time
you unlock your smartphone using your fingerprint, iris or facial
recognition, your physical features are analysed and compared to the
template you had provided. The mentioned properties of our bodies are
not the only features that can be used in the authentication. Others
include the retina, the pattern of blood vessels in the hand, hand
shape, the temperature of different sections of the face, ear shape and
the shape and position of teeth. Such solutions are designed to
eliminate or significantly limit the number of long and complex
passwords we need to use in our everyday life.

## Behavioral biometrics - a higher level of security{ .article-section }

Behavioral biometrics analyses and profiles our behavior. This usually
involves studying the ways we use our computers or smartphones, but it's
also possible to analyse the way we walk, the pace at which we type, our
voices or how we operate our devices. You see this type of biometrics
every day, e.g. in 'captcha' tests (in which you tick a box to verify
you are not a bot) that analyse the speed with which you click on the
box, the trajectory of your cursor and your precision rate.

## The advantages of behavioral biometrics{ .article-section }

One may ask: 'Why introduce a new solution if regular biometrics works
so well?' It turns out that the technology used today does have its
flaws. Fingerprint recognition is fast and intuitive in use but does not
work if your hands are wet. Moreover, it is relatively easy to forge a
template or force someone to use their print. Facial recognition works
regardless of whether your face is wet or not, but the lighting, either
too bright or too scarce, may interfere with the scanner's ability to
identify you, and the template may be copied, as in the case of the iris
scan.

Another asset of behavioral biometrics is that it works incessantly.
Imagine you log in to your bank account and get away from the keyboard
for a moment without logging off. Anyone who sits down at your computer
at that moment will have full access to your account. If a behavioral
biometrics system is used, it will detect a different user, e.g. by
analysing the movement of the cursor and block their access.

**Behavioral biometrics is less invasive, essentially undetectable to
the user. The prospect of logging to your bank account without the
bothersome two-step verification and the need to retype codes received
by applications or text messages, relying solely on our personal
templates, certainly seems attractive.**

Some may ask what would happen if, for instance, they broke an arm one
day and had to log in to their account typing their password with one
hand only. Experts assure us that the system would be able to adjust
even to such unexpected situations.

## How does behavioral biometrics work?{ .article-section }

Behavioral biometrics is based on the principle of gathering data on the
actions of a specific individual, analysing them to construct a template
and comparing future behaviour to the existing model. The stages of the
process are as follows:

-   **Data collection** consists of measuring (acquiring) various types
    of data, from the way the user holds their phone or operates the
    screen, to analysing what gestures and shortcuts they use when
    typing on the keyboard. Even the process of logging in to an account
    provides ample information: how fast we type in the password,
    whether we type one or two symbols at a time, or the entirety of the
    password in one go, and whether we switch between the boxes by
    clicking with the mouse or using the Tab key.
-   **Data analysis** begins when the sensors have collected the
    necessary information; a mathematical model is then created to be
    used as the basis for comparison.
-   **The comparison** involves checking the current data input against
    the existing model. If the result is matching (highly similar to the
    template), the user is granted access to their account, whereas if
    the similarity is lower than expected, the user will be able to view
    the account page but not able to make any transfers, or will be
    logged out automatically.

## The future of behavioral biometrics{ .article-section }

Selected banks are already working towards enabling authorisation
through the analysis of the users' interactions with their computers.
Since December 2018, 50 000 users have participated in testing this
feature for mBank.

The technology is expected to become widespread, as it does not
necessitate any changes, only requiring skillful management of the
already available data. Its expansion may additionally be facilitated by
the progress in machine learning and artificial intelligence.