+++
lang="en-GB"
title="Data Privacy, Data Security, Vol. III"
date="2021-11-16"
author="Eugen Wypiór"
image="/blog/Data-Privacy-Security-NP3-1.png"
tags=['ABC security','IT security', 'response&recovery']
+++

## Privacy & Security improvement tips for Windows users (and many others){ .article-section }

#### 1. Password

#### Use a strong password, something easy to remember but difficult to hack. There are a few good concepts around such as to use three random words or a passphrase -- such as Edward Snowden's 'MargaretThatcheris110%Sexy'.

#### 2. Offline account

Use an offline account for Windows rather than using a Microsoft
account.

#### 3. Disable public access

Disable public access for notifications and voice assistance on your
lock screen.

#### 4. Disc encryption

Use Full-Disk Encryption (FDE). Unfortunately, only the Pro (or higher)
versions of Windows are fitted with it (the BitLocker). So, if you are
fortunate to operate a Pro version of Windows enable this option. Else
wise use third-party disk encryption, ideally an Open-Source solution or
a proprietary one if you choose to do so. You should also use an FDE
solution for any external drives you use.

#### 5. Antivirus solutions

Antiviruses can improve security of your machine while at the same time
having a negative impact on your privacy as they collect a lot of data
(and they admit to it in the Term & Conditions of usage)

#### 6. Windows Defender

Use the built-in Windows Security (or as some might know it the Windows
Defender). It is free, it is designed to work with Windows (and hence
not to slow it down as some third-party antivirus solutions might do)
and it has been constantly improving over the years.

#### 7. Browser

The Browser you use can track all the sites you visit on the internet.
That's why it is important for you to use a Browser with a proven
privacy and security design. Use a Browser built with privacy in mind
such as Firefox, Brave, or Tor. If you value your privacy, try avoiding
Chrome (read Google) which has a long history of privacy issues.

#### 8. Search Engine

The Search Engine you use is another part that can track your online
activities. The two privacy-friendly mainstream Search Engines are
DuckDuckGo and Startpage. Note that Firefox, although a privacy-friendly
Browser by default uses a not privacy-friendly Google Search Engine. You
can easily change that in the Firefox Preferences \> Search settings and
opt for DuckDuckGo for example.

#### 9. VPN (Virtual Private Network)

Your IP address uniquely identifies you on the internet and is used by
websites to track you. A simple way to remedy this is to use a trusted
VPN provider to handle your web traffic. There are a lot of VPN
solutions available online. Make sure you do your due diligence before
choosing one.

#### 10. DNS (Domain Name Service)

DNS is the phone book of the internet helping you to reach the sites you
want to see on the internet, day in, day out. Most default DNS providers
track your movements on the web so it is a good idea to use a DNS
provider with privacy in mind. However, if you already use a VPN
service, they most likely use their own DNS so you don't have to worry
about it.

#### 11. Delete (or uninstall) unused apps

Each additional active application and setting increases the attack
surface and the possibility for abuse of your personal information.
Apart from the impact on your privacy and security, unused apps take up
your valuable storage space and have a negative impact on your power
consumption. So, delete the apps you don't use. It will do you (and your
device) good.

#### 12. PWA (Progressive Web Apps)

Some apps have their browser versions. It works just as your regular app
but from the inside of the browser. There are many advantages to this
solution. Firstly, it frees up your disk space. Secondly, using an app
from within a browser is safer and gives you more control over what you
allow it to do (especially from the privacy perspective).

#### 13. Clear data you don't need on a regular basis

Regularly remove old system logs, temporary browsing data such as cache,
cookies and browsing history, and any sensitive content which you don't
need constant access to on your computer.

#### 14. Settings and Permissions

There are a lot of settings and permissions on Windows which you might
not be using but which nevertheless constantly collect data about your
activities. As with unused apps above, if you don't use them (the
particular system features), turn them off, such as Cortana for example.
Therefore, go through the many permissions on your Windows and disable
those you have no use for.

The same applies to programs and apps -- go through the settings and
permissions of each program you use to make sure they are not tracking
you for no reason.

#### 15. Software updates

Use automatic updates for your operating system, programmes, and
drivers. This is the best way to make sure that you run the most current
versions which will be free from any publicly known vulnerabilities and
thus offer you the most up-to-date protection from attacks.

#### 16. FOOS (Free and Open-Source Software)

FOOS means that the code used in an application is publicly accessible
to everyone. The advantage of this is, you can personally verify the
security and privacy solutions used by the software. Wherever you can,
try and switch your application to a FOOS solution.

#### 17. Radios

Radios are the features of your computer which emit signals such as
Bluetooth, WiFi or GPS (if you have one built-in). For enhanced privacy
and security disable Bluetooth and Location Service when you don't need
to use them. Bluetooth can be an insecure protocol and it can be used to
track your movements -- it probably applies more to your mobile device
(such as your phone) but if you move a lot with your laptop the same is
true.

So just like with unused apps -- if you don't use them delete them -- if
you don't use your Bluetooth and your WiFi, turn them off (WiFi
broadcasts a unique MAC address which can be used to track your device)

#### 18. Multiple-use accounts

You can set up multiple user accounts on Windows in order to separate
different areas of your daily activities. For example, you can have a
business account, a personal account, and a gaming account. This will
enhance your privacy.

What is even more important, you can have an administrator account and a
standard user account and only use the standard user account on a daily
basis. This gives you an extra layer of protection. This prevents rogue
applications, malware, or other unauthorised access from damaging your
system.

### Do you require help with securing your IT or OT environment?

[SEQRED [offers assistance in providing comprehensive security solutions
for IT and OT systems. It offers services in the areas of Security
Audits, Network Segmentation, Mobile Device Security, Cloud Security,
and many others.]{style="color: #000000;"}]{style="color: #e02b20;"}

To discuss your requirements, contact SEQRED at [\[email protected\]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

###### **About this guide**

The idea for this article was inspired mainly by a presentation by Techlore which you can watch [here.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vNRics7tlqw)
