+++
lang="en-GB"
title="Data Privacy, Data Security. Vol. I"
date="2021-04-01"
author="Eugen Wypi√≥r"
image="/blog/Data-Privacy-Security-NP-1.png"
tags=['ABC security','IT security', 'response&recovery']

+++

Privacy, in general terms, is the right to be free from intrusion and
interference. In common language, the right to be left alone. In the
legal system of a lot of countries privacy is one of the fundamental
human rights.

In terms of Information Technology, Data Privacy is the field related to
the obtaining, handling, processing, and use of personal information and
the rights of individuals in respect of their personal information.

The importance of the ways data is handled and what happens with it has
risen very significantly over the last few decades with the accelerating
advancement of Information Technologies. As the name indicates, it is a
technology concerned with and fuelled by information. A technology
where, like never before in the current history of humankind, data
became a commodity like wheat, coal, or crude oil. And like any other
commodity, it has a value, it has a price.

And some jurisdictions are attempting to curb the nearly unrestrained
information greed of the IT-run industries. To protect its citizens'
right to privacy in the increasingly digital reality we live in the EU
has introduced in May 2018 a legal framework that sets guidelines for
the collection and processing of personal information from individuals
who line in the European Union. The General Protection Regulation (GDPR)
was designed to provide greater protection and rights to individuals
altering the way businesses and organisations handle the information
entrusted to them. This takes us to the next point.

## Privacy and the software cycle - Privacy by Design (PbD){ .article-section }

Nowadays customers privacy is only an afterthought in the Systems
Development Life Cycle (SDLC). Systems and applications are developed
without the privacy of the end-user in mind. The general approach is to
tackle data privacy after the software is shipped into production and
issues start to be fixed when they are identified. But it doesn't have
to be like this, and it shouldn't. A great reference for moving data
privacy upstream in the SDLC is Dr. Ann Cavoukian's principles of
Privacy by Design which advance data protection and privacy in the
design phase of a service or application. Because fulfilling statutory
requirements of Privacy Policies informational pages don't do much good
without creating IT systems that securely store, share, and use personal
data.

The seven principles of Privacy by Design are:

1. Proactive approach to prevent a breach rather than to remedy it

It is better to prevent a privacy breach in the first place rather than
respond to it after it takes place. For this to occur thinking about
privacy -- data collection, retention, and use procedures -- must be
present at the beginning of the app or service development cycle to
protect that user information.

2. Valuing privacy as the default setting

A service pr app should only collect the minimum type of user
information it needs. This gives you less to protect and in case of a
breach results in less damage.

In the traditional approach, there is a tendency to over-collect data
with the view that some of it might be needed in the future.

3. Privacy embedded into the design

Authentication and encryption must be embedded into the design as much
as functional capabilities. This includes testing for hacker
vulnerabilities before the product is released. This means for privacy
to be implemented at the same time as the functional capabilities.

4. Full functionality - positive-sum, not zero-sum

Privacy by Design favours the 'win-win' outcome seeking to accommodate
all legitimate interests and objectives. It is possible to protect the
privacy and ensure profitability.

5. Full lifecycle protection of the information entrusted - from input to deletion

Thanks to embedding Privacy by Design into the system before the first
piece of information is collected, the data is protected at each stage
of its lifecycle, through creation, sharing, retention, and finally, its
elimination when it is no longer needed.

Encryption and authentication are the best ways to offer full lifecycle
protection.

6. Visibility and transparency - keep it open

Communicating with stakeholders in a clear and understandable language
so they have the confidence that the service is operating as promised in
line with stated objectives and subject to independent verification.

8. Taking a user-centric approach

The information belongs to the user, and they can revoke their
permission for it to be used at any time.

###### **About this article**

The idea for this article is inspired by a blog entry of Data Privacy
Manager which you can access [here.](https://dataprivacymanager.net/security-vs-privacy/)

Further inspiration came from TermsFeed's blog - click [here](https://www.termsfeed.com/blog/privacy-design/)

And last but not least a blog entry on Stockoverflow - available [here.](https://stackoverflow.blog/2021/07/19/privacy-is-an-afterthought-in-the-software-lifecycle-that-needs-to-change/?fbclid=IwAR2Iy9NDvooOu7TVAMW6oXliXcBwHFjsu9GH0G5MmRB-gl11QR9rYSwW-lI)